This is a list of ideas that would require significant work. In no particular
order:

1. Improve find UI. The one I like the best is in Chrome browser (with 
modification needed for specyfing search parameters like case sensitivity
and additions like 'match whole words' modifier).
We could then free up significant amount of space in the toolbar.

2. Screen space is always at premium and most PDFs have very wasteful
margins. Good Reader has a really nice feature for manual cropping of margins
(http://www.goodiware.com/gr-man-view-pdf.html#crop). They have a mode for
manually selecting visible part of the PDF, similar to how many graphics
program implement cropping. Cropping can be set for all pages or separately
for odd/even pages. Cropping can also be reset. After cropping, the program
only shows the non-cropped part. This would be especially valuable for small
screens (netbooks/small laptops).

Note: Automatic cropping is currently implemented as "Fit Content" View mode.

3. Editing/saving of PDF forms. Many people want that.

4. eBooks seem to be all the rage those days. Add ePub support?

4a. I always wanted a good .cbr & .cbz viewer but existing ones aren't to my
liking. Extend Sumatra to support those?

4b. SumatraPDF's interface would be nice for viewing XPS documents as well.

4c. Make SumatraPDF extensible with different format back-ends/plugins and
turn it into a general document viewer?

5. Add integration with web-based backup/viewer system. The idea is that users
could easily backup their PDFs on the server. They would have a convenient
access to those PDFs from Sumatra as well as being able to view them on the
web. Basically it would be private Scribd for PDFs only. The web service
would have to be paid (since on-line storage is rather expensive) but there
would be free accounts (with quota, similar to how Dropbox works).

6. As an alternative (or addition) to 5., integration with Scribd i.e. being
able to search for PDF documents on Scribd and download/view them in Sumatra.
They have APIs (http://www.scribd.com/developers).

7. Direct integration with Dropbox (they have APIs) i.e. being able to list,
download and read PDF files in Dropbox account. Not sure if that makes sense,
though, since having Dropbox pretty much means the files are locally anyway.

8. PDF library management similar to how e.g. Picasa manages photos or iTunes
manages mp3 files.

User would tell us which directories contain PDF files (or, on Win 7, we
could use windows search or scan the whole hard-drive to automatically find
all *.pdf files). We would index the files (their filenames, PDF metadata, maybe
extract text for full-text search), build thumbnails and allow efficient 
browsing/searching those PDFs.

This would be a good feature for those who have large collections of PDFs
(compared to using file explorer or open file dialog for locating the file).
